.TH PIPES 3 2014-09-03 "" "PIPES"
.SH NAME
pipes \- build pipe chains

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <pipes/pipes.h>
.sp
.BI "int pipes_open(char const *const " argv "[], char const *const " envp "[],
.BI "               struct pipes* " pipes ");
.BI "int pipes_close(struct pipes* " pipes ");
.sp
.BI "int pipes_open_chain(struct pipes_chain " chain "[]);
.BI "int pipes_close_chain(struct pipes_chain " chain "[]);
.BI "int pipes_kill_chain(struct pipes_chain " chain "[], int " sig ");
.sp
.BI "int pipes_take_in(struct pipes_chain " chain "[]);
.BI "int pipes_take_out(struct pipes_chain " chain "[]);
.BI "int pipes_take_err(struct pipes_chain " chain "[]);
.sp
.BI "#define PIPES_GET_LAST(" CHAIN ")
.BI "#define PIPES_GET_IN(" CHAIN ")
.BI "#define PIPES_GET_OUT(" CHAIN ")
.BI "#define PIPES_GET_ERR(" CHAIN ")

.SH DESCRIPTION
Functions to build pipe chains between programs.

.SS pipes_open()
Spawn a child process and open pipes to it's io streams.

.IR argv " is a NULL terminated array of arguments. The first one is the program to execute
and does not need to be an absolute path.

.IR envp " is a NULL terminated array of environment variables. After forking, the child
.RB "processes global " environ " variable will be set to this value. If
.IR envp " is NULL it will be ignored. See also:
.BR environ "(3)

.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct pipes {
	pid_t pid;     /* process ID of opened child process */
	int   infd;    /* pipe to stdin of child process     */
	int   outfd;   /* pipe to stdout of child process    */
	int   errfd;   /* pipe to stderr of child process    */
};
.fi
.in

.RI "The " infd ", " outfd ", and " errfd " fields of " pipes " may either be set to valid
file descriptors or to one if the following special values. In case they are file descriptors
they will be used as the appropriate stream in the child process and will be closed in the parent
.RB "process. " pipes_open "() ensures that any passed file descriptor will be always closed,
no matter if the call was successful or resulted in an error.

.TP
.B PIPES_LEAVE
Leave stream unchaned (i.e. don't open a pipe to the stream of the child process).

.TP
.B PIPES_PIPE
Open a pipe to this stream of the child process. For
.IR infd " the write end of the pipe will be returned in the same field. For " outfd "
.RI "and " errfd " the read end of the pipe will be retuned in the same field.

.TP
.B PIPES_NULL
Pipe this stream to/from
.IR /dev/null .

.TP
.B PIPES_ERR_TO_OUT
Redirect child process stderr to stdout. This is only valid for the
.IR errfd " field.

.TP
.B PIPES_TEMP
Open a temporary file as this stream. If supported by the kernel and filesystem this
.RB "will be done using the " O_TMPFILE " flag. A copy of the file descriptor will be
returned in the same field.

.PP
.RI "These helper macros can be used to initialize the " pipes " structure:

.TP
.B PIPES_PASS
.RI "Set " infd " and " outfd " to
.BR PIPES_PIPE " and set
.IR errfd " to
.BR PIPES_LEAVE .
This is useful for intermediaries in a pipe chain.

.TP
.B PIPES_IN(IN)
.RI "Set " infd " to
.IR IN ",
.IR outfd " to
.BR PIPES_PIPE " and
.IR errfd " to
.BR PIPES_LEAVE .

.TP
.B PIPES_OUT(OUT)
.RI "Set " infd " to
.BR PIPES_PIPE ",
.IR outfd " to
.IR OUT " and
.IR errfd " to
.BR PIPES_LEAVE .

.TP
.B PIPES_ERR(ERR)
.RI "Set " infd " to
.BR PIPES_PIPE ",
.IR outfd " to
.BR PIPES_LEAVE " and
.IR errfd " to
.IR ERR .

.TP
.B PIPES_FIRST
.RI "Set " outfd " to
.BR PIPES_PIPE " and the rest to
.BR PIPES_LEAVE .
This is useful for the first command in a chain.

.TP
.B PIPES_LAST
.RI "Set " infd " to
.BR PIPES_PIPE " and the rest to
.BR PIPES_LEAVE .
This is useful for the last command in a chain.


.SS pipes_close()
.RB "Close all pipes previously opened with " pipes_open "(). It is save to call this
.RB "even if the " pipes_open "() call failed.

.SS pipes_open_chain()
Spawn a number of child prcesses and open pipes between them. Intermediate pipes are
not accessible by the calling process.

.RI "The last element of " chain " is marked by setting " argv " to NULL. " envp
.RI "can be NULL and " pipes " must be initialized in the same way as for
.BR pipes_open ().

.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct pipes_chain {
	struct pipes       pipes;   /* see above                         */
	char const* const* argv;    /* NULL terminated argument array    */
	char const* const* envp;    /* NULL terminated environment array */
};
.fi
.in

.SS pipes_close_chain()
.RI "Close all pipes in " chain ". It is save to call this even if the
.BR pipes_open "() call failed.

.SS pipes_kill_chain()
.RI "Send signal " sig " to all processes in " chain .

.SS pipes_take_in()
Return the pipe to the input stream pipe of the first process in the
.IR chain ". The " infd " field in the chain will be set to -1 so a successive
.BR pipes_close_chain "() call won't close it.

.SS pipes_take_out()
Return the pipe to the output stream pipe of the last process in the
.IR chain ". The " outfd " field in the chain will be set to -1 so a successive
.BR pipes_close_chain "() call won't close it.

.SS pipes_take_err()
Return the pipe to the error stream pipe of the last process in the
.IR chain ". The " errfd " field in the chain will be set to -1 so a successive
.BR pipes_close_chain "() call won't close it.

.SS PIPES_GET_LAST()
.RI "Macro to get the last pipe in " CHAIN ". " CHAIN " must be an array, not
a pointer.

.SS PIPES_GET_IN()
.RI "Macro to get the input stream pipe of the first process in " CHAIN .

.SS PIPES_GET_OUT()
.RI "Macro to get the output stream pipe of the last process in " CHAIN ". " CHAIN
must be an array, not a pointer.

.SS PIPES_GET_ERR()
.RI "Macro to get the error stream pipe of the last process in " CHAIN ". " CHAIN
must be an array, not a pointer.

.SH ERRORS
TODO...

.TP
.B EINVAL
TODO...

.SH SOURCE
Get the source at https://github.com/panzi/pipes

.SH AUTHOR
Mathias Panzenböck (grosser.meister.morti@gmx.net)

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fpipes (3),
.BR environ (3),
.BR execvp (3),
.BR fork (3),
.BR popen (3)
